$date
2011-06-25

$title
Flipboard's layout algorithm

I did some poking around how Flipboard lays out content, and here are
my observations.

1. The portrait and landscape layouts are identical -- the internal
content of an article reflows when the orientation flips, but the
overall article layout remains exactly the same. So in the rest of
this, I'll only refer to the portrait orientation.

<img class="half_cright" alt="impossible recursive rectangle cutting" src="/media/img/cab634ee7aa06bdc55a0f50344b560a953cc73e9.png"/>2. The layout process is almost certainly "recursive rectangle
cutting" rather than packing a set of rectangles. In other words,
start with a big rectangle, then make a complete cut horizontally or
vertically, and recursively cut each smaller rectangle. The tell-tale
sign of such a process is you never see a layout like this.
Ie, there is always at least one cut that goes from one side of
the rectangle being cut to its opposite side, and so on, recursively.

3. You can therefore associate a "cut tree" with any layout, where
each node represents a cut -- horizontal or vertical -- and is
labelled with the location of the cut position(s). The choice of
cutting positions are heuristics, and Flipboard's approach seems to be
to pick small integer ratios of the parent.

If you ignore "dual" ratios (eg: 1/3 and 2/3 would be duals of each
other) Flipboard picks cut positions that are located 1/2, 1/3, 1/4,
2/5, and 3/8 of the parent. Which one to pick at any step is possibly
a combination of how large the content is, and some randomization.

For example, this layout

<img alt="sample layout" src="/media/img/719620bec84d7706d14978d7d9602af2c9b00713.png" class="centered"/>

$asis
<div class="clear"></div>

corresponds to this cut tree.

<img alt="cut tree" src="/media/img/f6ee63ce25195e0d6adf4299abd4015eab2d4663.png" class="centered"/>

$asis
<div class="clear"></div>

There are very likely more constraints in use, for example vertical
cuts never use the 1/4 ratio, and further, a "vertical cut node"
avoids vertical cut children in its subtree. For instance, a layout
that has a root vertical cut (so it goes from top to bottom) never has
any other vertical cuts. There can of course also be more than one cut
tree that produces the same layout -- eg: a layout that's divided into
four equal-sized quadrants has two equivalent cut trees, depending on
whether you start with a horizontal or a vertical cut.


That said, there's more than one way to approach the problem, and
it can be useful to understand the underlying design goals, rather
than view it as purely a problem of "packing" content. (Example via
<a href="http://gridness.net/">Gridness</a>)

<img alt="Gridness - page layout sample" src="http://gridness.net/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/elehpant-4.jpg" class="centered"/>

Many modern designers and magazines layout content within a grid, and
you can see an example about the <a
href="http://www.vignelli.com/canon.pdf" title="Vignelli
Canon">underlying ideas here</a>.

In essense, the page is divided into a grid that resembles a
checkerboard, and each element of interest is reflowed into a
contiguous subset of blocks. The intent is to establish a visual
structure to the content, which the grid helps to maintain. Whitespace
is often just as important as content, and eventually each grid block
ends up being either used as content or whitespace. (This is often
overlooked in many "packing" approaches to layout, though you may be
able to incorporate it as "blank content" to be packed along with
everything else.)

Being aware of an underlying grid can potentially simplify algorithms
as well as allowing internal content to settle along grid lines. A
fairly basic approach can still use rectangle cutting, but just select
one of the grid lines at each cut (rather than ratios of the parent,
as Flipboard does.) It can also allow you on occasion, to create
non-rectangular areas, especially with reflowable content. For
example, you may be able to subtract a set of blocks out of an
enclosing rectangular set, to add related content, and so on. You can
see it in the pullquotes in this example from <a
href="http://www.behance.net/gallery/Beast-in-a-Neon-Cage/1193381"
title="Layout example with pull quotes">the Behance Network</a>.

<img alt="Layout with pull quotes" src="http://behance.vo.llnwd.net/profiles2/203970/projects/1193381/d1ebfe16a56c0997825736a0f40dad7d.jpg" class="centered"/>
