$date
2011-12-03

$title
Book Review: Grouped

<a href="https://twitter.com/Padday">Paul Adams</a> is an insightful
guy. I was wowed by his early thoughts on online social networks from
back when he was <a
href="http://www.slideshare.net/padday/the-real-life-social-network-v2">trying
to plug his ideas at Google</a>.

So I've been waiting to read (and just finished) <a
href="http://www.amazon.com/Grouped-groups-friends-influence-social/dp/0321804112">his
recent book "Grouped"</a>, and a brain dump of that if you're curious.

It is a fast read, and feels a lot like an "Elements of Style" for
online social marketing. There isn't much discourse on theory, rather
a list of expanded bullet points on what goes on in online networks,
with a focus on marketing. The list of references at the end of each
topic is excellent, and worth pursuing.

Should you read it? Whether or not you choose to read <em>this</em> book,
here's his perspective:

<em>[To stay relevant] a new knowledge set is required [for]
designers, marketers, developers and advertisers: social behavior,
networks, and how people think.</em>

The book distills his thoughts on these topics into self-contained
chapters, and coming from a guy who's probably had as many scars here
as anyone else, it'll be a useful reference for a practitioner to
spark ideas and avoid some mistakes.

However, the underlying ideas are things that he's been thinking and
talking about for a while, and you can get the general flavor from <a
href="http://vimeo.com/29576241">a video of one of his recent
talks</a> if you prefer.

Some of the homilies that stayed with me:

1. The social web is not merely a buzz. It will gradually become what
we think of as just "the web."

2. Think of the social web like electricity -- you don't have an
"electricity experience" in a product, it invisibly drives everything
and you just use it.

3. Center your products around people, not the technology or even the
content. Or somebody else will, and eat your lunch to boot. (The video
above has a example about Facebook photos and why it grew, interesting
perspective for any 'fish readers. Also interesting examples from
Etsy, nytimes and so on.)

4. The myth of the highly influential few. Highly connected does not
mean highly influential. He points out the situation in social groups
is more nuanced -- basically a rebuttal to the tipping point thesis as
applied to social marketing.ï»¿
