$date
2012-12-12

$title
TypesetView: typesetting niceties for Android

<a href="https://github.com/kbsriram/typesetview">TypesetView</a> is a
View that's great for displaying paragraphs of rag-right, static body
text in your Android app. It adds typographic niceties from more
sophisticated text layout engines, allowing refined control over your
content. Multicolumn text, TeX-style line breaks, margins that flow
around arbitrary shapes and more.

<strong>Multi-column text.</strong>

<img class="centered" src="https://github.com/kbsriram/typesetview/raw/master/docs/columns_landscape.png" alt="Multi-column landscape example"/>

You can either directly set the number of columns, or just specify a
minimum column width. If you set a minimum column width, TypesetView
will automatically add columns based on the available width.

<strong>Flexible margins.</strong>

<img class="centered" src="https://github.com/kbsriram/typesetview/raw/master/docs/flow_combined.png" alt="Flexible margins example"/>

You can programatically control the margins for each line in the
View. You can even write code to flow text around arbitrary paths,
like around the large "O" glyph above.

<strong>Advanced linebreaks.</strong>

Unlike TextView, TypesetView wraps lines after examining a full
paragraph of text. This allows it to minimize long gaps in a paragraph
of rag-right text, if possible. Here is a side-by-side comparison of
TextView on the left, and TypesetView on the right.

<img class="half" src="https://github.com/kbsriram/typesetview/raw/master/docs/linebreak_sample.png" alt="Linebreak sample"/>
TypesetView has moved the word "of" from the first line down to the second line, which leaves a slightly bigger gap for the first line. However, this lets it avoid a much larger gap in the third line. Software typophiles - it minimizes the sum of the squares of the end-of-line gaps in text that's set rag-right. It uses a variation of the Knuth-Plass algorithm (used in TeX.) It doesn't hyphenate words, and the "badness" of a line is simply the square of the right-side gap. The last line is ignored in the calculations.

<strong>And lastly...</strong>

A few small, but handy typographic controls.

<img src="https://github.com/kbsriram/typesetview/raw/master/docs/glue_animated.gif" alt="Glue expansion animation" class="centered"/>

First, you can allow the expansion of inter-word spaces in controlled
amounts, if you want to further minimize gaps at the ends of lines.

Second, you can set the <a
href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leading">typographic leading</a>
explicitly, rather than TextView's unintuitive spacing "multipliers"
and "adders". If you want to set text at 16/18dp - you just set
typeSize and typeLeading to 16dp and 18dp respectively.

Third, you can directly specify font families -- including fonts you
include under your <tt>assets/</tt> folder -- directly from your XML.

<strong>Using TypesetView</strong>

Clone the TypesetView repository, and add <tt>typesetview-library</tt>
as a library project. To add a TypesetView within your layout, you
might do something like

$code_begin
<ScrollView
  xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
  xmlns:typeset="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto"
  android:layout_width="match_parent"
  android:layout_height="wrap_content">

  <org.kbsriram.android.typesetview.TypesetView
    android:layout_width="match_parent" 
    android:layout_height="wrap_content"
    typeset:typeColor="#ff303030"
    typeset:typeSize="12sp"/>
</ScrollView>
$code_end

Notice that you should use
<tt>http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto</tt> to refer to the
attributes that are specific to TypesetView.

Here are the TypesetView specific attributes you can specify.

<tt>typeText</tt> is a String, the text to display.

<tt>typeColor</tt> is a Color to use for the text.

<tt>typeFontFamily</tt> is a String, naming the font to use. There are
three pre-defined names, <tt>sans-serif</tt>, <tt>serif</tt> and
<tt>monospace</tt>, which will use the appropriate system provided
fonts. If you prefix the name with the magic string <tt>assets/</tt>
-- for example -- <tt>assets/Roboto-Slab.ttf</tt> -- it will look for
a font file at that location under your applications <tt>assets/</tt>
directory. In all other cases, it will ask the system to create the
font using the provided name.

<tt>typeSize</tt> is a dimension for the text size.

<tt>typeLeading</tt> is a dimension for the leading (ie. the distance
between baselines of text.

<tt>typeGutterWidth</tt> is a dimension for the space between columns
of text.

<tt>typeMaximumLineStretch</tt> is a dimension that controls the
maximum amount a line is permitted to expand. By default, it is equal
to the leading.

<tt>typeMaximumGlueExpansionRatio</tt> is a float and must be at least
1. Spaces between words are not allowed to expand larger than this
ratio. By default, it is 1.22

<tt>typeColumnWidth</tt> is a dimension. Specify this to set a minimum
column size, and TypesetView will automatically add columns as
needed. If you specify this, you cannot also specify
<tt>typeColumnCount</tt>.

<tt>typeColumnCount</tt> is an integer greater than 0. Specify this to
set exactly this many columns, regardless of the width of the view. If
you specify this, you cannot also specify <tt>typeColumnWidth</tt>.

You can programatically control margins by implementing the
TypesetView.MarginPosition interface. Please look at the provided
examples for further guidance on using this interface. Good luck and
make great content!

<img class="centered" src="https://github.com/kbsriram/typesetview/raw/master/docs/goofing_around.jpg" alt="A nice layout"/>

<small>Some images and text used within the examples are from the
<a href="http://www.ndc.co.jp/en/">Nippon Design Center</a>.</small>
